# What is the Enactor Toolkit?

The Enactor Toolkit is an advanced and powerful set of Visual Development Tools that enable IT teams easily to visualise, understand and change the Data Structures, User Interfaces and Processes represented in software that span a commercial enterprise. In particular, Visual ***Process Design Editors*** at both the Application and Business Process levels abstract the Process Flows of a potentially large and cumbersome code base allowing Designers, Developers and Business Analysts to readily apprehend and control the overall flow of an Application or System. 

## Who is the Toolkit for?
Both technical and non-technical professionals alike may interpret and understand the high-level logic of Processes represented in the Process Editors, thereby providing a foundation for discussion of change requirements in a design representation context that ***is*** the application. The Design Elements represented in the Enactor Tools design editors are the same elements used at build and runtime to implement applications and systems.

## What makes up the Enactor Toolkit?
The ***Wizards, Editors and Design Tools*** provide the primary interface to design Applications using the Enactor Toolkit and are directly available for use in Eclipse. The Classes and Superclasses of the ***Enactor Platform*** provide a foundation of built-in software elements and the ***Runtime Framework*** runs the application, using the element definitions of the design at Runtime to execute the application. The ***Resource Library*** is a rich library of reusable Design Resources. In addition to all the Design elements created by the Designer and any other Design Resources available in other Projects in the Workspace, the library includes numerous ready-made and built-in Design Resources provided by the Enactor Tools and Platform. 

During the evolution of a process centric view of application and system development Enactor has identified two levels of Process Flow with different tools for each:

### Application Process Flow
Application flows represent the behaviour of an application to different events such as user interface, device interaction and communications. Applications essentially become diagrams that link together small pieces of reusable code and abstract the Application logic away from the user interface. Application flow diagrams in Enactor generally start from a logical representation of how a business user would imagine an application operating and gradually evolve through prototypes into fully functional applications, still in the form of diagrams.

### Business Process Flows
These operate at a higher level and typically link together multiple applications and systems through tasks and activities. Stages within a Business Process allocate tasks to users and execute system activities. Tasks are generally allocated through a generic task list that is standard across all systems. System activities are generally background jobs, which interact with other applications and systems using web service calls or messaging. Business Flow diagrams in Enactor generally start from a representation of how a business user would see the high-level stages in a long-running process and evolve into fully functional processes, still in the form of diagrams.

## It’s All Still Java

The Enactor ToolSet is not simply a glue for linking up impenetrable building blocks, the developer retains access to the full scope of the Java language to use or replace existing elements or create entirely new elements, processes or applications or even replace framework components by writing straight-in Java code. The use of Enactor’s wizards to facilitate the initial creation of high-level application elements is often a good first step when creating an application or new process. However, at all stages the option to access the underlying code is always available. The Developer has all the benefits of Automation without loss of the Flexibility of Java Code and can exercise direct access to Java at all levels without loss of Automation facilities. These built-in features of Automation increase the Quality and Robustness of the Design. For example, the Application Process Flow Designer performs design time validation of data types, connections, expression validity and so on. To perform their functions, Enactor Tools have built-in ‘awareness’ of the Design, the Design Elements, and their relationships, from the time they are initially created and throughout the design and development process, which is encoded in XML. At all times during the Design process and for all Design Elements this XML is itself directly accessible to the Designer within the Design Editors. But as described following, to emphasise the point, it can all be done manually, without the Design Tools. It’s all still Java.

